---
Layout: post
mathjax: true
comments: true
title:  "The battle of the bulge"
categories: [Physics, Hacks]
date:  2020-10-21
---

**October 21, 2020.** *The earth spins and the equator bulges, turning
  from a sphere into a flattened ellipsoid. To estimate just how
  flattened, we assume that the potential energy is the same at the
  equator and the poles, and find an equatorial bulge only a few
  hundred meters off the correct result!*

#### Energy in a spinning frame

Suppose you're in a spinning reference frame with angular velocity
$\omega$, and a distance $r$.
You will be subject to an acceleration

$$
a = \frac{v^2}{r} = \omega^2 r.
$$

This looks like a *centrifugal force* $F = ma$, arising from a quadratic
potential

$$
F = -\frac{dU_\text{cent}}{dr} \quad \Longrightarrow \quad U_\text{cent} = -\frac{1}{2}m
\omega^2 r^2.
$$

If your spinning reference frame is the earth, then there is a
gravitational potential $U_\text{grav} = -GMm/R$, where $M$ is the
earth's mass and $R$ is the distance to the centre.

We will try to estimate the earth's bulge by assuming that the
*potential is the same at the poles and the equator*.
If the earth was a fluid (and the surface *was* molten at some point),
it would redistribute until there were no differences in potential
across the surface, the same reason the surface of a fluid in a cup is
level.
At the poles, there is no spinning, so $\omega = 0$, and

$$
U_{\text{pole}} = U_{\text{grav}}(R) = -\frac{GMm}{R},
$$

where $R$ to be the distance from the centre of the earth to the
poles.
Technically, if the earth is *not* a sphere, then the sphere theorem
(that objects are attracted to the centre) no longer applies, but the
corrections will be small enough we can ignore them.

#### An equatorial expansion

Now, suppose that the radius at the equator is slightly larger, $R +
r$.
Then, including the centrifugal potential,

$$
U_{\text{eq}} = U_{\text{cent}}(R+r) + U_{\text{grav}}(R+r) = -\frac{1}{2}m
\omega^2 (R+r)^2 -\frac{GMm}{R+r}.
$$

We want to equate this with $U_\text{pole}$ and solve for $r$, but
this will lead to a horrible cubic equation to solve.
To proceed, we use a typical physicist's trick: if $\epsilon \ll 1$, then

$$
\frac{1}{1+\epsilon} \approx 1 - \epsilon,
$$

since $(1+\epsilon)(1-\epsilon) = 1 - \epsilon^2 \approx 1$.
In our case, this gives

$$
\frac{1}{R+r} = \frac{1}{R(1+r/R)} \approx \frac{1}{R} - \frac{r}{R^2},
$$

and hence, after some algebra, an equation for the equatorial radius

$$
(R+r)^2 = \frac{2GMr}{\omega^2 R^2}.
$$

We can expand the LHS and solve for $r$ using the quadratic formula.
But since we've approximated away $r^2$ once, we should be consistent
and do it again.
In other words, we expand the LHS and keep only the *linear* term, to get

$$
r \approx R\left(\frac{GM}{\omega^2 R^3} - 1\right)^{-1}.
$$

This is reasonably simple!

<!-- $$ r^2+2r\left(R - \frac{2GM}{R^2}\right) + R^2 = 0 \quad -->
<!-- \Longrightarrow \quad R + r = \frac{2GM}{R^2} + \sqrt{\left(R - -->
<!-- \frac{2GM}{R^2}\right) \left(R + \frac{2GM}{R^2}\right)\right]}. $$-->
<!-- \sqrt{\left(R - \frac{2GM}{R^2}\right)^2 - R^2} -->

#### Comparing to reality

The mass and polar radius of the earth are approximately

$$
M = 5.972 \times 10^{24} \, \text{kg}, \quad R = 6.357 \times 10^6 \, \text{m},
$$

while Newton's constant is $G = 6.674 \times 10^{-11}$ in SI units.
The angular frequency is just 1 revolution per day, or

$$
\omega = \frac{2\pi}{T} = \frac{2\pi}{24 \text{ hours}} = 7.272 \times
10^{-5} \, \text{s}^{-1}.
$$

Plugging these numbers in, we get an estimate for the equatorial
bulge,

$$
r = 21700 \, \text{m},
$$

or $r \approx 22 \text{ km}$.
Now, for the real result. Drum roll please...

$$
r = 21385 \, \text{m},
$$

so we are only off by $300$ metres or so!

<!-- (6.357 \times 10^6)\left(\frac{(6.674 \times 10^(-11))(5.972 \times 10^(24))}{(7.272 \times
10^{-5})^2 (6.357 \times 10^6)^3} - 1\right)^(-1) -->
