---
Layout: post
mathjax: true
comments: true
title:  "The uncertainty principle and virtual particles"
categories: [Physics]
date:  2020-10-23
---

**October 23, 2020.**  *According to physics folklore,
  virtual particles are objects which can flit in and out of existence,
  governed by Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. But what is uncertainty in time? And what are virtual
  particles? I offer a semi-rigorous connection using the
  Mandelstam-Tamm and Robertson-Schrödinger uncertainty relations,
  where virtual particles are connected to fluctuations in particle
  number.*

#### Contents

1. <a href="#sec-1">Introduction to uncertainty</a>
2. <a href="#sec-2">MTML bound</a>
3. <a href="#sec-3">Robertson-Schrödinger uncertainty</a>
4. <a href="#sec-4">Virtual particles</a>
5. <a href="#sec-5">A coherent cubic example</a>
6. <a href="#sec-6">Particles and antiparticles</a>
7. <a href="#sec-7">Conclusion</a>

#### 1. Introduction to uncertainty<a id="sec-1" name="sec-1"></a>

*Prerequisites: quantum mechanics.*

When Heisenberg layed down his uncertainty principle in 1927, it came
in two flavours: position-momentum and energy-time.
Schematically, these are usually written

$$
\Delta x \cdot \Delta p \gtrsim \hbar, \quad \Delta E \cdot
\Delta t \gtrsim \hbar.
$$

What we mean by uncertainty is a bit uncertain.
Often, the first semi-rigorous context we encounter these notions is
the *wavepacket*, i.e. a well-localized wavefunction in space $|\psi(x)\rangle$.
This has some spread of positions $\Delta x$, but we can Fourier
transform to momentum space, where it will have some spread $\Delta p$.
The uncertainty principle is then a mathematical result about the
Fourier transform, and in fact, it is true for any wavefunction, not
merely the well-localised ones.

We can derive the energy-time form for a wavepacket using the
following hack.
Let $\psi(x, t)$ denote the profile of the wavepacket.
We assume it's well-localised around some wavenumber $k_0$, so it has *group
velocity*,

$$
v = \frac{\partial \omega}{\partial k}\bigg|_{k_0} = \frac{\hbar
\partial \omega}{\hbar\partial k}\bigg|_{k_0} = \frac{\partial E}{\partial p}\bigg|_{k_0},
$$

using $E = \hbar \omega$ and $p = \hbar \omega$.
If we linearize around the central wavenumber, we have

$$
\omega(k) \approx \omega(k_0) + v(k - k_0) \quad \Longrightarrow \quad
v = \frac{\Delta \omega}{\Delta k} = \frac{\Delta E}{\Delta p},
$$

where now $\Delta p$ is interpreted as the momentum spread of the
wavepacket and $\Delta E$ is the corresponding energy spread.
Let $\Delta t$ be the time taken for the wavepacket to
travel the distance of its own spread, $\Delta x$, then $v\Delta t =
\Delta x$.
The position-momentum uncertainty principle then gives

$$
\Delta x \cdot \Delta p = v\Delta
t \cdot \Delta p \approx \frac{\Delta E}{\Delta p} \cdot \Delta
t \cdot \Delta p = \Delta E \cdot \Delta t \gtrsim \hbar.
$$

So we get the energy-time form of the uncertainty principle!

But it's very different from the position-momentum form.
Position and momentum are *bases* to measure the wavepacket in,
i.e. they correspond to legitimate quantum-mechanical operators.
Energy is also a legitimate operator; we call it the Hamiltonian.
But time is not an operator! Here, it appears very specifically as the
time the wavepacket takes to move a whole $\Delta x$ away.
Physically, this is the point at which *the position changes
distinguishably*.
Prior to this time, there is large overlap between the wavepackets at
the two different times.
This is the seed of a rigorous version of the energy-time uncertainty
principle which doesn't depend on having a localized wavepacket.

#### 2. MTML bound<a id="sec-2" name="sec-2"></a>

In 1945,
[Mandelstam and Tamm](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-74626-0_8)
gave the first rigorous version of the energy-time uncertainty
relation.
It's important, because it tells us what it really means!
I'll present the nice proof from
[Levitin and Toffoli (2009)](https://arxiv.org/abs/0905.3417).
Consider some initial state $|\psi_0\rangle$ in a Hilbert space, which
evolves according to a Hamiltonian $H$ with eigenstates $|E_n\rangle$.
Averages with respect to this state are denoted $\langle A\rangle_0 =
\langle\psi_0|A|\psi_0\rangle$.
We can expand our state $|\psi_0\rangle$ and its time-evolved
counterpart in energy eigenstates as

$$
|\psi_0\rangle = \sum_n C_n |E_n\rangle, \quad |\psi_t\rangle = \sum_n
C_n e^{-i E_n t/\hbar} |E_n\rangle,
$$

with normalization giving $\sum_n |C_n|^2 = 1$.
Define the overlap

$$
O(t) = \langle \psi_0 | \psi(t)\rangle = \sum_n |C_n|^2 e^{-i E_n t/\hbar}.
$$

Motivated by the wavepacket example, we expect an energy-time relation
between the energy uncertainty $\Delta E = \sqrt{\langle
H^2\rangle_0 - \langle H\rangle_0^2}$, and the time $\tau$ taken to
evolve to a state with no overlap, $O(\tau) = 0$, i.e. a state which is perfectly distinguishable.
First, we write out the overlap squared:

$$
\begin{align*}
|O(t)|^2 & = \sum_{mn}|C_nC_m|^2 e^{i(E_m - E_n)t/\hbar} =\sum_{mn}|C_nC_m|^2 \cos\left[\frac{(E_m - E_n)t}{\hbar}\right].
\end{align*}
$$

The last equality follows because the overlap squared is real, so we can take the real
part of each term without prejudice.
To proceed, we need to invoke a slightly magical trigonometric
inequality,

$$
\cos x \geq 1 - \frac{4}{\pi^2}x \sin x - \frac{2}{\pi^2}x^2.
$$

Applied to the overlap squared, this yields

$$
\begin{align*}
|O(t)|^2 \geq 1 - &\frac{4}{\pi^2}\sum_{mn}|C_nC_m|^2
\sin\left[\frac{(E_m - E_n)t}{\hbar}\right]\frac{(E_m -
E_n)t}{\hbar} \\ - & \frac{2}{\pi^2}\sum_{mn} |C_nC_m|^2\left[\frac{(E_m -
E_n)t}{\hbar}\right]^2,
\end{align*}
$$

where the first term uses $\sum_{mn}|C_mC_n|^2 = 1$.
We can simplify this by observing that the second term is

$$
\sum_{mn}|C_nC_m|^2
\sin\left[\frac{(E_m - E_n)t}{\hbar}\right]\frac{(E_m -
E_n)t}{\hbar} = -t\frac{d}{dt}|O(t)|^2,
$$

which will vanish when $O(\tau) = 0$.
The last term is related to the energy spread, since

$$
\begin{align*}
\sum_{mn} |C_nC_m|^2(E_m - E_n)^2 & =\sum_{mn} |C_nC_m|^2(E_m^2 +
E_n^2 - 2E_m E_n) \\
& = 2\langle H^2\rangle - 2\langle H\rangle^2 =
2\Delta E.
\end{align*}
$$

Thus, we find that when $O(\tau) = 0$,

$$
0 \geq 1 - \frac{1}{\pi^2}\left(\frac{2t \Delta E}{\hbar}\right)^2.
$$

Rearranging gives the Mandelstam-Tamm form of the energy-time
uncertainty principle:

$$
\Delta E \cdot \tau \geq \frac{\pi \hbar}{2}.
$$

You might wonder if we could have manipulated things a different way
and obtained a different result.
In fact, we can!
We will need another magical inequality,

$$
\cos x \geq 1 - \frac{2}{\pi}(x + \sin x).
$$

Now just take the real part of $O(t)$:

$$
\begin{align*}
\Re[O(t)] & = \sum_n |C_n|^2 \cos(E_nt/\hbar) \\
	& \geq \sum_n |C_n|^2
	\left[1 - \frac{2}{\pi}\left(\frac{E_nt}{\hbar}+\sin\left(\frac{E_nt}{\hbar}\right)\right)\right]\\
	& = 1 - \frac{2 Et}{\pi \hbar} + \Im[O(t)],
\end{align*}
$$

where $E = \langle H\rangle$ is the average energy.
As before, when the state evolves to an orthogonal state with $O(\tau) = 0$, the real and
imaginary part vanish, and we are left with the uncertainty relation
of [Margolus and Levitin (1997)](https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9710043):

$$
E \tau \geq \frac{\pi \hbar}{2}.
$$

Both bounds are correct, so we use whichever is most constraining.
We'll call this combined bound the *Margolus-Levitin-Mandelstam-Tamm (MLMT) uncertainty relation*:

$$
\tau \geq \text{max}\left\{\frac{\pi\hbar}{2\Delta E}, \frac{\pi\hbar}{2E}\right\}.
$$

We will mainly be interested in the Mandelstam-Tamm bound, but
Margolus-Levitin was so close I couldn't resist the temptation to
derive it as well.

#### 3. Robertson-Schrödinger uncertainty<a id="sec-3" name="sec-3"></a>

Let's return to the position-momentum version for a moment.
As before, for a state $|\psi\rangle$, we define the spread as the
standard deviation of expectations measured in the state:

$$
\Delta x = \sqrt{\langle x^2\rangle-\langle x\rangle^2}, \quad
\Delta p = \sqrt{\langle p^2\rangle -\langle p\rangle^2}.
$$

For this definition, the precise form of the uncertainty relation is
$\Delta x \cdot \Delta p \geq \hbar/2$.
The *canonical commutation relations* $[x, p] = i\hbar$ tell us that
position and momentum do not commute, and cannot be measured
simultaneously. Since this is true for any state, it is true that
$\langle[x, p]\rangle = i\hbar$.
So, we can rewrite position-momentum uncertainty as

$$
\Delta x \cdot \Delta p \geq \frac{1}{2} |\langle [x, p]\rangle|.
$$

In fact, it's a relatively straightforward exercise to generalise this to
*arbitrary* operators in a pure state:

$$
\Delta A \cdot \Delta B \geq \frac{1}{2}|\langle [A, B]\rangle|.
$$

This is called the *Robertson-Schrödinger uncertainty principle*
(continuing our pattern of double-barrel uncertainty relations) after
[Howard Percy Robertson](https://journals.aps.org/pr/abstract/10.1103/PhysRev.34.163)
and Erwin Schrödinger.
The expectation of the commutator lower bounds the
product of uncertainties.
We can connect this to energy-time uncertainty by plugging in the
Hamiltonian for one of the operators:

$$
\Delta E \geq \frac{1}{2 \Delta A}|\langle [H, A]\rangle|.
$$

Levitin and Toffoli (2009) showed that Mandelstam-Tamm is sometimes
tight, so we assume it is the higher bound. In this case,

$$
\tau \leq \tau_A = \frac{\pi\hbar\Delta A}{|\langle [H, A]\rangle|},
$$

where $\tau_A$ is a "Mandelstam-Tamm-Robertson-Schrödinger" (MTRS) timescale
associated with $A$.
The time needed to evolve to an orthogonal
state has a bound made smaller by the amount of
*non-conservation* of $A$, as measured by $[H, A]$, and larger by the
variance $\Delta A$.
As a quick reminder, in the Heisenberg picture $[H, A] = i\hbar\dot{A}$.
Thus, if they commute, the expectation of $A$ is
conserved.

<!-- $$\begin{align*}
\langle A\rangle_t = \langle \psi(t)| A |\psi(t) \rangle & = \langle \psi| A(t) |\psi \rangle 
\\ & = \langle \psi(0)| e^{i H t/\hbar} A e^{-i H t/\hbar} |\psi(t)
\rangle \\
& = \langle \psi(0)| A e^{i H t/\hbar} e^{-i H t/\hbar} |\psi(t) \rangle = \langle A\rangle_0.
\end{align*} $$-->

This connection seems physically reasonable.
If the expectation of $A$ is changing, it witnesses that
$|\psi(t)\rangle$ is becoming more distinguishable from
$|\psi(0)\rangle$.
On the other hand, a large uncertainty $\Delta A$ washes out this effect, since $A$
is too blurry to usefully tell us about changes in the state.
In fact, since $[H, A] = i\hbar\dot{A}$, we should have

$$
|\langle [H, A] \rangle| = \hbar |\langle \dot{A}\rangle| \sim \hbar
\frac{|\Delta A|}{|\Delta \tau|}.
$$

If we interpret $|\Delta A| = \Delta A$ as the spread, and plug into
MTRS, we get

$$
\tau_A = \pi \Delta \tau,
$$

where $\Delta \tau$ is the time needed to change the expectation of
$A$ by $\Delta A$:

$$
\langle A\rangle_{\tau_A/\pi} - \langle A\rangle_{0} \sim \Delta A.
$$

This is very similar to the wavepacket case, and uses the same sort of
implicit localisation, but in the $A$-basis.

#### 4. Virtual particles<a id="sec-4" name="sec-4"></a>

We'll now turn to a specific example of $A$: *particle number*.
The basic setup requires a Fock space, which we take to be bosonic for
simplicity.
We have a set of creation and annihilation operators $a_i^\dagger,
a_i$, satisfying commutation relations

$$
[a_i, a^\dagger_j] = \delta_{ij}.
$$

The states take the form of products of single particle states built
by acting on the vacuum with creation operators:

$$
|n_1, n_2, \ldots, n_k\rangle = C (a_1^\dagger)^{n_1}\cdots (a_k^\dagger)^{n_k}|0\rangle,
$$

for a normalisation constant $C$.
The *number operator* $N_i = a_i^\dagger a_i$ counts the number of $i$
quanta, since the commutation relations imply

$$
N_i |n_1, n_2, \ldots, n_k\rangle = n_i |n_1, n_2, \ldots, n_k\rangle.
$$

Now, this is all static; it has nothing to do with the Hamiltonian.
In particular, *particle number need not be conserved*.
A state may have a well-defined particle number, with $\Delta N_i$
small, but the expected number of particles can change quickly
depending on the commutator $[H, N_i]$.
The particles which appear out of nowhere, or rather, by virtue of
time evolution, are precisely virtual particles!
When Mandelstam-Tamm is tight, we know the state will become
distinguishable after the MTR timescale,

$$
\tau_i = \frac{\pi\hbar\Delta N_i}{|\langle [H, N_i]\rangle|}.
$$

If my interpretation of the MTRS timescale is correct, they will become distinguishable by measurements of the number operator $N_i$ itself.

#### 5. A coherent cubic example<a id="sec-5" name="sec-5"></a>

To get a feeling for what's going on, consider the simplest nontrivial
example, a perturbed harmonic oscillator with Hamiltonian

$$
H = \hbar \omega \left(N + \frac{1}{2}\right) + \lambda
\left[(a^\dagger)^2 a + a^\dagger a^2\right] = H_0 + \lambda I,
$$

where $N = a^\dagger a$ and $H_0$ is the unperturbed harmonic
oscillator, with $[N, H_0] = 0$, and $\lambda I$ is a cubic
interaction which can fuse two particles into one, or split a particle
into two.
Both processes are required for unitarity, i.e. a Hermitian $H$.
Using the commutator identity $[A, BC] = [A, B]C + B[A, C]$, it's easy
to show that

$$
[N, I] = [N, a^\dagger N + Na] = [N, a^\dagger]N + N[N, a] = a^\dagger
N - Na.
$$

Eigenstates of $N$ have zero spread in particle number, but also zero
commutator expectation, as a quick calculation shows.
A more reasonable example is a
[coherent state](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coherent_state), an
eigenvalue of $a$ rather than $N$:

$$
|\alpha\rangle = e^{-|\alpha|^2/2}\sum_{n\geq
0}\frac{\alpha^n}{\sqrt{n!}}|n\rangle, \quad a |\alpha\rangle = \alpha
|\alpha\rangle,
$$

where $\alpha$ is an arbitrary complex number.
This has the following properties:

$$
\langle N\rangle_\alpha = |\alpha|^2, \quad \Delta N =|\alpha|,
$$

In the absence of interactions, this is a Gaussian wavepacket which
wobbles back and forth in position space, without changing shape, at
the frequency of the oscillator.
There will be an position-momentum uncertainty, associated with this
motion, and indeed this saturates the wavepacket uncertainty relation
discussed above.

But when we introduce the cubic interaction, there is a new source of
uncertainty: changes to the measured particle number, which still
appear even if we cling to the wobbling wavepacket and measure its
properties.
Rather than solve for the wavefunction over time (an analytically
impossible task), we can use the MTRS timescale to estimate when the
interaction appreciable changes particle number!
For a coherent state, the commutator is

$$
\langle [N, I]\rangle_\alpha = \langle a^\dagger N\rangle_\alpha -
\langle N a\rangle_\alpha = -2\Im[\alpha] |\alpha|^2 = -2|\alpha|^3\sin\theta
$$

for $\theta = \text{arg}(\alpha)$.
The MTRS timescale can then be written

$$
\tau_N = \frac{\pi \hbar}{2 |\lambda\alpha^2 \sin\theta|}.
$$

This has some sensible features.
If $\lambda = 0$, and there is no interaction, then we will never see
any change in expected particle number.
If $\theta = 0$, then $\alpha$ has no imaginary part, and there is no
transition; roughly, $\theta$ tells us the asymmetry between the
forward and the backward process, required for there to be an overall
change in expected particle number.
Finally, as $\alpha \to 0$, we simply recover the ground state of the
unperturbed Hamiltonian, which cannot change
expected particle number since we need particles to make or destroy
particles.

#### 6. Particles and antiparticles<a id="sec-6" name="sec-6"></a>

We can do a similar calculation in a more interesting example with a
basic version of particles and antiparticles.
Consider three species of particles with annihilation operators $a, b,
c$, and Hamiltonian,

$$
H = \sum_{x=abc}\hbar \omega_x \left(N_x + \frac{1}{2}\right) +
\lambda (N_{\text{pair}}c + c^\dagger N_{\text{pair}}),
$$

where $a$ and $b$ are an particle-antiparticle, pair-produced by $N_{\text{pair}}$:

$$
N_{\text{pair}} = (a + b^\dagger) (a^\dagger + b) = N_a + N_b + 1.
$$

The interaction term means we can destroy a $c$ particle and
pair-produce $a$ and $b$, as well as the converse process.
We will repeat the same calculation as the previous section, focusing
on transitions in $c$ particle number.
First, note that since $a, b, c$ and daggers all commute, the
canonical commutation relations for $c$ imply

$$
[N_c, I] = N_{\text{pair}}[N_c, c] + [N_c, c^\dagger]N_{\text{pair}} =
c^\dagger N_{\text{pair}} - N_{\text{pair}} c.
$$

Once again, for simplicity, we consider a coherent $c$-state,
$|\gamma\rangle$, with no $a$ or $b$ particles.
Then

$$
\begin{align*}
\langle [N_c, I]\rangle_\gamma & = -2\Im \langle N_{\text{pair}}
c\rangle_\gamma \\
& = -2\Im [\gamma \langle N_a + N_b + 1\rangle_\gamma] \\
& = - 2|\gamma| \sin\theta,
\end{align*}
$$

where $\theta = \text{arg}(\gamma)$.
Thus, we obtain an MTRS timescale

$$
\tau_c = \frac{\pi \hbar}{2 |\lambda \sin\theta|}.
$$

Even though there are no $a$ or $b$ particles in the initial state,
and we do not observe them, "virtual" $a$ and $b$ particles induce a
change in the expected number of $c$ quanta.
Interestingly, only the angle $\theta$ and note the size $|\gamma|$
are relevant.

We can generalise this easily to a coherent state of $a, b, c$
particles (since they commute),

$$
|\psi\rangle = |\alpha, \beta, \gamma\rangle,
$$

which yields a MTRS timescale

$$
\tau_c = \frac{\pi\hbar}{2|\lambda \sin\theta (1+|\alpha|^2 + |\beta|^2)|}.
$$

If there are more $a$ and $b$ particles in the initial state, the
transition is achieved more quickly, since now we 

#### 7. Conclusion <a id="sec-7" name="sec-7"></a>

It would be nice to obtain a rigorous understanding of the MTMR
timescale, perhaps using similar techniques to Levitin and Toffoli.
It would also be interesting to explore how the MTMR timescale is
related to the MTML bound.
Perhaps more intriguingly, it remains to connect this non-relativistic picture
to the other rigorous interpretation of virtual particles: *off-shell*
excitations mediating interactions in quantum field theory.

I expect that we can generalize the cubic example to multiple particle
species and interactions, and see how, for example,
changes in the expected number of some species $i$ are sped up by interactions
through a coupled species $j$. This can be "unobserved" in the sense that
we only measure changes in $N_i$, but not the fluctuations in $N_j$.
But more to the point, these mediating $j$ particles may not even appear in the
initial and final state --- they pop into and out of existence, as it
were --- but do appear in $[N_i, I]$ and hence modify the MTRS timescale.
I leave checking this as an exercise for the interested reader and/or a future paper!

#### References

<!-- - ["Energy Cost of Information Transfer"](https://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.46.623)
  (1981), Jakob D. Bekenstein. -->
<!-- - ["Quantum noise and information"](https://projecteuclid.org/euclid.bsmsp/1200513783)
  (1967), H. J. Bremmerman. -->
- ["Quantum speed limits: from Heisenberg’s
uncertainty principle to optimal quantum control"](https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.08023)
(2017), Sebastian Deffner and Steve Campbell.
- ["Ultimate physical limits to computation"](https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9908043) (2000), Seth Lloyd.
- ["The fundamental limit on the rate of quantum dynamics: the unified bound is tight"](https://arxiv.org/abs/0905.3417) (2009), Lev B. Levitin and
  Tommaso Toffoli.
- ["The uncertainty relation between energy and time in non-relativistic quantum mechanics"](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-74626-0_8)
  (1945), L. Mandelstam and Ig. Tamm.
- ["The maximum speed of dynamical evolution"](https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9710043) (1997), Norman Margolus, Lev B. Levitin.
- ["The uncertainty principle"](https://journals.aps.org/pr/abstract/10.1103/PhysRev.34.163) (1929), H. P. Robertson.

<!-- *If you believe the speed-reading hype, you can
  read as fast as you like without sacrificing
  comprehension. Responsible psychological research shows this is not
  the case: there is inevitably a cognitive tradeoff between speed and
  fidelity of processing. I perform some less responsible "research"
  and show that, even for a brain vastly superior to ours, there are
  fundamental physics limits on speed reading.* -->

<!-- Now we return to our original problem, namely, placing a fundamental
physical limit on speed reading.
As a test case, we consider Marcel Proust's six-volume epic, *In Search of Lost Time*.
It has around $1.3$ million words, which translates to around
$6$ million bits, assuming a compressibility of one bit per character,
as discussed above. The Bremmerman-Bekenstein bound depends on how heavy the book is.
The Modern Library edition weights in at $m = 3.7 \text{ kg}$, with a
maximal rate $$\nu \leq \frac{\pi mc^2}{\hbar ln 2} \approx 1.5 \times 10^{52} \text{ bit s}^{-1}.
$$ So it can be properly read in $T = 4 \times 10^{-46} \text{ s}$, with
a decrease in time in direct proportion to how much you skim.-->

<!-- #### Appendix: magical inequalities-->

<!-- If $|\psi\rangle$ is an eigenstate of the number operator, then
everything is zero, both $\Delta N$ and the expectation of $[N, I]$,
since
$$
\langle [N, I]\rangle \propto \langle a^\dagger \rangle - \langle a
\rangle = 2\Im \langle a^\dagger \rangle = 0.
$$
So, to get something nontrivial, we need a spread of number
eigenstates, say $|\psi\rangle = \sum_n A_n |n\rangle$, so that
$$
\langle N\rangle = \sum_n |A_n|^2 n, \quad \Delta N^2 = \sum_n |A_n|^2
n(n - \langle N\rangle).
$$
Using the identity,
$$
a^\dagger|n\rangle = \sqrt{n+1}|n+1\rangle,
$$
the expectation of $[N, I]$ is
$$
\begin{align*}
\langle[N, I]\rangle & = 2\Im \sum_{mn} A_m^* A_n \langle m| a^\dagger
N|n\rangle\\
& = 2\Im\sum_{mn} A_m^* A_n n \langle m| a^\dagger
|n\rangle \\
 & = 2\sum_{n} \Im[A_{n+1}^* A_{n}] n\sqrt{n+1}.
\end{align*}
$$
If the state is sharply peaked around some large integer particle number
$\langle N\rangle = N^*$, with $\Delta N \ll N^*$,
$$
\langle[N, I]\rangle \approx 2\Im[A_{N^*+1}^* A_{N^*}] n\sqrt{n+1}.
$$-->
