---
Layout: post
mathjax: true
comments: true
title:  "Cashing a blank check"
categories: [Mathematics, Statistics]
date:  2021-01-26
---

**January 26, 2021.** *Suppose you find a blank check on the ground,
  and unscrupulously decide to cash it in. How much should you cash it
  in for, if you want to avoid a check that bounces and gets you
  nothing?*

#### Introduction

In the film "Blank Check" (1994), 11-year old Preston Waters is
handed a blank check, and cashes it in for a million dollars.
Luckily, this is precisely the amount of money that the check's
signer, a convict attempting to launder his ill-gotten gains, has left
with the bank's president.
But what if Preston overdrew, asking for, say, $10$ billion?
This would probably have raised the suspicions of the complicit
bank president and the check would have bounced altogether.
When I was a kid, I thought it was incredibly lucky for Preston to
find the check in the first place.
I now think drawing the precise amount of money held in trust is
infinitely luckier.
But this raises the question: if you find a blank check, and you don't
want it to bounce, how much should cash it in for?

#### Expected return

I'll assume we know nothing about the identity of the signee, and that
if they have a balance of $b$, and we make out the value of the check
to be $v$, then the check will bounce if $v > b$.
Our strategy will be to calculate the expected return for $v$ and then
maximise it.
If $f(b)$ is the probability distribution for bank balances, then the
expected return for $v$ is simply $v$ multiplied by the probability $b> v$:

$$
E(v) = v \int_v^\infty f(b) \, db = v[1 - F(v)] = v \bar{F}(v),
$$

where $F$ is the cumulative distribution function, and the $\bar{F} =
1 -F$ the tail.
To maximise this, we assume the curve is smooth, differentiate and set
to $0$, using $\bar{F}' = -f$:

$$
E'(v) = \bar{F} - vf(v) = 0 \quad \Longrightarrow \quad  v = \frac{\bar{F}(v)}{f(v)}.
$$

Any $v$ which satisfies this equation is an extremum.

#### Long and short tails

Now the question is how to model the distribution of bank balances.
This is the sort of thing expected to follow a power-law
curve like the
[Pareto distribution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pareto_distribution),
the proverbial "80-20" curve.
This is simply defined by its power-law tails:

$$
\bar{F}(v) = \left(\frac{L}{v}\right)^\alpha,
$$

where $L$ is the minimum amount to keep a bank balance open (say a
monthly fee), and $\alpha > 0$ is a shape parameter we will "leave blank" for the moment.
This is well-defined since it heads to zero.
The probability density for $v \geq L$ is

$$
f(v) = -\bar{F}'(v) = \frac{\alpha L^\alpha}{v^{\alpha + 1}}.
$$

The optimal draw then obeys

$$
v = \frac{\bar{F}(v)}{f(v)} = \left(\frac{L}{v}\right)^\alpha \cdot
\frac{v^{\alpha + 1}}{\alpha L} = \alpha v.
$$

For $\alpha \neq 1$, the only solutions are $v = 0$ and $v = \infty$!
For $\alpha > 1$, we can plot the expected return $E(v)\propto
v^{1-\alpha}$, and see that it monotonically decreases, with the maximum at $v = L$.
Preston should only have asked for a few bucks!
But perhaps this is an artefact of the infinite power-law tail.
A more realistic choice is the *truncated* Pareto distribution, where
the power law is confined to $L \leq v \leq H$ for an upper limit $H$,
say the personal wealth of Jeff Bezos or Elon Musk.
The density for the truncated Pareto distribution is simply a
conditional probability, conditioned on being in the interval $[L, H]$:

$$
f(v) = \frac{\alpha L^{\alpha}v^{-(\alpha+1)}}{1 - (L/H)^\alpha},
$$

and the tail is

$$
\bar{F}(v) = \int_v^H \frac{\alpha L^{\alpha}v^{-(\alpha+1)}}{1 -
(L/H)^\alpha} dv = \frac{(L/v)^\alpha - (L/H)^\alpha}{1 - (L/H)^\alpha}.
$$

Thus, we now have to solve

$$
v = \frac{\bar{F}(v)}{f(v)} = \frac{(L/v)^\alpha -
(L/H)^\alpha}{\alpha L^{\alpha}v^{-(\alpha+1)}} \quad \Longrightarrow
\quad v = (1-\alpha)^{1/\alpha} H.
$$

Once again, the answer is independent of the lower bound, but
proportional to the upper bound, which as we take $H \to \infty$,
returns our original result.
If $\alpha < 1$, then we do get a finite answer, proportional to the
upper bound, so for instance if $\alpha = 0.5$, and we take the upper
limit to be around 100 billion dollars, then Preston should ask for

$$
v \sim \sqrt{1-0.5}  10^{11} \approx 70 \text{billion}.
$$

But if $\alpha \geq 1$, the prefactor is not real, and for the full
Pareto distribution, the maximum expected return occurs at $L$.
And indeed, wealth typically does obey an approximate Pareto
distribution with $\alpha > 1$.
For instance, the proverbial "80-20" rule occurs for $\alpha
\approx 1.16$, and
[this analysis](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0165176505002995)
of the Forbes 400 richest people in the world finds a shape parameter
of $\alpha = 1.49$.
So once again, a rational Preston would ask only for the monthly fee!
This would, of course, make for a far less interesting movie.
