---
Layout: post
mathjax: true
comments: true
title:  "The Schrödinger equation on the cheap"
categories: [Maths, Physics, Hacks]
date:  2021-04-17
---

**April 17, 2021.** *A quick post explaining how matter waves lead to
  natural definitions of momentum and energy operators, and with some
  inspired guesswork, the Schrödinger equation. There is
  nothing new, just (I hope) a digestibly clear throughline.*

#### Light and matter

We learnt in a
[previous post](https://hapax.github.io/physics/mathematics/hacks/emcc/)
that Einstein's famous formula $E = mc^2$ can also be written

$$
E^2 = m_0^2 c^4 + p^2 c^2,
$$

where $m_0$ is the rest mass of the object we're considering and $p$
its momentum.
If the object happens to be a *massless* particle, say a photon of
light, then $m_0 = 0$ and we end up with the curious identity:

$$
E = pc.
$$

Now, it just so happens we have a different expression for the energy
of a photon. This was also proposed by Einstein in 1905, to
[explain why](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Photoelectric_effect)
shining a light bulb on a bit of metal releases electrons only when the
bulb colour is blue enough.
Qualitatively speaking, the conclusion is that light isn't interacting
with electrons as a wave, whose energy is determine by brightness, but
as a *particle* whose energy is determined by colour!
From the experimental results, he deduce that the energy per particle
of light is

$$
E = hf,
$$

where $f$ is the frequency (oscillations per second) and $h = 6.63 \times 10^{-34} \text{ J s}$ is *Planck's constant*.
Using our two expressions for the energy, we find that the momentum of
a photon is

$$
p = \frac{hf}{c}.
$$

You can use this to compute how many laser pointers you would need to repel
an incoming asteroid before it hits the earth (exercise left to the reader).

#### Plane waves

But if we zoom out from the photon, or rather, *measure it
differently*, say by getting it to
[diffract](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffraction) through some
slits rather than disloding individual electrons from a metal, it will
be described by a wave.
For simplicity, let's consider a single spatial dimension $x$.
A *plane wave* is a simple sinusoidal displacement of some medium
(e.g. air pressure, the surface of a body of water, electromagnetic
fields) with amplitude

$$
\Psi (x, y) = \Psi_0 \sin \left[k(x - vt)\right].
$$

The constant $ \Psi_0$ is just the maximum size of the envelop, but $k$
and $v$ require a bit more explanation.
Here, $v$ is the *speed* of the wave, since a point of fixed $C = x -
vt$ in time $\Delta t$ must move $\Delta x$ obeying

$$
C = x - vt = (x + \Delta x) - v (t + \Delta t) = C + \Delta x -v
\Delta t \quad \Longrightarrow \quad \frac{\Delta x}{\Delta t} = v.
$$

If we take a snapshot of the wave at fixed time $t$, then it will
repeat itself when the argument of the sine function is increased by
$2\pi$, or

$$
k(x - vt) \mapsto k(x - vt) + 2\pi = k\left(x + \frac{2\pi}{k} - vt\right).
$$

Since $t$ is fixed, it follows that when we increment $x$ by $2\pi/k$,
the wave repeats itself. In other words, $\lambda = 2\pi/k$ is the
*wavelength*.
By the same reasoning, if we freeze $x$ the wave repeats itself with a
period in time,

$$
T = \frac{2\pi}{vk}.
$$

Since the frequency $f = 1/T$ is the inverse of the period, we find
that frequency times wavelength equals speed:

$$
f\lambda = \frac{vk}{2\pi}\cdot \frac{2\pi}{k} = v.
$$

At this point, It will simplify things dramatically to use the
[exponential](https://hapax.github.io/maths/physics/hacks/exponential/)
instead of the sine wave.
Since Euler's marvellous formula tells us that

$$
e^{i\theta} = \cos\theta + i \sin\theta,
$$

we can replace the sinusoid with

$$
\Psi (x, t) = \Psi_0 e^{i k(x - vt)},
$$

and if we really want the sine, just consider the imaginary part.

#### The momentum operator

Let's now consider a photon, moving at speed $v =c$ and with momentum
obeying

$$
p = \frac{hf}{c} = \frac{hf}{f \lambda} = \frac{h}{\lambda} =
\frac{h}{2\pi}\cdot \frac{2\pi}{\lambda} = \hbar k,
$$

where we used $c = f\lambda$, $k = 2\pi/\lambda$, and defined a new
constant $\hbar = h/2\pi$, called *Planck's reduced constant*.
This lets us rewrite the plane wave as

$$
\Psi(x, t) = \Psi_0 e^{i (p/\hbar)(x - ct)} = \Psi_0 e^{i(px - Et)/\hbar}.
$$

In 1924, Louis de Broglie made the bold suggestion that *matter could
also be described as a wave*, with momentum and energy obeying the
same relation.
These *matter waves* could therefore exhibit wavelike-behaviour, like
bending around obsctacles and interfering.
This has been observed not only with electrons, but massive
[buckyballs](https://www.nature.com/articles/44348). 
Pretty nifty!
We won't be concerned with this, however.
Instead, we would like to think how to *extract* the momentum from a
plane wave.
One way is to rearrange $\Psi(x, t)$ to find $p$.
Instead, we will define a procedure which simply pulls $p$ out.
It is, as you have probably already guessed, simply the derivative
with respect to $x$:

$$
\frac{\partial}{\partial x}\Psi(x, t) = \Psi_0 \frac{\partial}{\partial
x}e^{i (px - Et)/\hbar} = \frac{ip}{\hbar} \Psi(x, t).
$$

The *momentum operator* $\hat{p}$ is simply defined as the operation
which gives us $p$ (in front of the original function) without the
extra constants $i$ and $\hbar$. More precisely,

$$
\hat{p} = -i\hbar \frac{d}{d x},
$$

where we pretend $t$ is fixed so that the partial derivative becomes a
normal derivative.

One of the distinctive characteristics of waves is
that the displacements add and subtract nicely. This is called the
[superposition principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superposition_principle).
What happens with momentum then?
A cute thing about this operator, as opposed to the algebraic
expression which isolates $p$, is that we can apply it to *any
combination of plane waves*.
For instance, if we consider

$$
\Psi(x, t) = \Psi_1(x, t) + \Psi_2(x, t) = \Psi_{0}^{(1)} e^{i (p_1x - E_1t)/\hbar} + \Psi_0^{(2)}e^{i (p_2x - E_2t)/\hbar},
$$

then

$$
\hat{p}\Psi(x, t) = p_1 \Psi_1(x, t) + p_2 \Psi_2(x, t).
$$

No single nice momentum that sits out the front of the whole
wave (unless $p_1 = p_2$), but this tells us something important: such
a combination *doesn't have* a well-defined momentum!
The momentum will be *uncertain*.
We might guess that the uncertainty depends on the relative size of
the amplitudes $\Psi_{0}^{(1)}$ and $\Psi_{0}^{(2)}$, and this guess is correct.
We won't pursue the generalisations (the
[uncertainty principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heisenberg_uncertainty)
and the [Born rule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Born_rule)) here.

#### The energy operator

Let's end, briefly, with the Schrödinger equation.
In 1926, Erwin Schrödinger went on vacation in the Swiss alps, taking
only de Broglie's thesis with him.
By the end of his getaway, he had derived the fundamental equation of
quantum mechanics.
How did he do it?
He was guided by many subtleties we won't care about, but the basic
observation is simple: define an *energy operator* in the same way we
defined the momentum operator.
For a plane wave $\Psi(x, t) = \Psi_0 e^{i(px - Et)/\hbar}$, we have

$$
i\hbar \frac{\partial}{\partial t} \Psi(x, t) = E \Psi(x, t),
$$

suggesting we define the energy operator

$$
\hat{H} = i\hbar \frac{\partial}{\partial t}.
$$

For historical reasons, we use $\hat{H}$ for
["Hamiltonian"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamiltonian_(quantum_mechanics))
instead of $\hat{E}$ for "energy".
But, for a classical particle with only kinetic energy, energy and
momentum are related by

$$
E = \frac{1}{2}mv^2 = \frac{(mv)^2}{2m} = \frac{p^2}{2m}.
$$

Schrödinger simply guessed this held as an operator
equation. Substituting the actual expressions in terms of partial derivatives:

$$
i\hbar \frac{\partial}{\partial t}\Psi = -\frac{\hbar^2}{2m}
\frac{\partial^2}{\partial x^2} \Psi.
$$

Of course, a particle can get energy from other places. If it rolls
around on a slope, for instance, there will be some potential energy
$V$, and the classical energy is

$$
E = \frac{p^2}{2m} + V.
$$

Once again, we promote this to an operator $\hat{H}$. Schrödinger's
guess was that we still had

$$
\hat{H} = i\hbar \frac{\partial}{\partial t},
$$

and hence

$$
i\hbar \frac{\partial}{\partial t}\Psi = \left(-\frac{\hbar^2}{2m}
\frac{\partial^2}{\partial x^2} + \hat{V}\right)\Psi,
$$

where $\hat{V}$ is an operator corresponding to the classical
potential in the same way that momentum and energy get promoted to
operators. Actually doing this promotion is technical and ambiguous,
but we leave that for another time.
Hopefully, however, this makes the origin of the Schrödinger equation
a bit less mysterious!

#### Acknowledgments

Thanks to J.A. as usual.
