---
Layout: post
mathjax: true
comments: true
title:  "Eternal recurrence and brainjam"
categories: [Philosophy]
date:  2021-01-15
---

**January 15, 2021.** *In a
  [previous post](https://hapax.github.io/philosophy/physics/psychology-time/),
  I advanced a four-dimensionalist version of eternal recurrence
  which I call "brainjam". In
  this post, I discuss the moral dimensions of eternal recurrence, its
  relation to fatalism and free will, and end by discussing some
  subtle but important differences from brainjam.*

#### Introduction

In a
[previous post](https://hapax.github.io/philosophy/physics/psychology-time/),
I argued that it was possible to reconcile four-dimensionalism (a
belief that all times exist) with our peculiar experience of time.
Put simply, each moment is *always* being experienced, a sort
of "brainjam" by which our life is pickled into the
spacetime continuum.
The sense that time passes and the impression of sequence are (and must
be) cognitive artefacts rather than incorrigible metaphysical data.
For arguments in favour of this view, and other elaborations, I refer
to that post.
<!-- Here, I want to discuss some of the broader philosophical aspects of
brainjam, and how it relates to eternal recurrence, fatalism, the
nature of individual identity and free will. -->
Here, I want to compare brainjam to the doctrine of eternal recurrence:
the idea that time is cyclic and we are doomed to repeat ourselves.
I'll discuss some of the broader philosophical aspects of eternal
recurrence, such as how it relates to fatalism, free will and
identity, and in the last section, compare and contrast with brainjam.

#### Amor fati

A cyclic model of time is, evidently, an archetypal thought, popping
up everywhere in
classical antiquity from Egypt to India, Greece to Mesoamerica.
Cycles have a certain economy of pattern, and even today,
[cyclic views](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cycles_of_Time)
of the universe remain popular.
In many cases, the cycles are allowed to change (or vary on a theme),
but *recurrence* occurs when the cycle must strictly repeat itself.
For all its metaphysical prettiness, recurrence has fundamental
implications for human life.
The Stoics taught a "love of fate", or *amor fati*. Take the aphorism
of Marcus Aurelius (*Meditations*):

<span style="padding-left: 20px; display:block">
Accept the things to which fate binds you, and love the people with
whom fate brings you together, but do so with all your heart.
</span>

Almost 2000 years later, Friedrich Nietzsche would combine eternal
recurrence and *amor fati* into a similar ethic, a
love of reality beyond the stale, life-denying categories of European thought.
<!-- to counterbalance his infamously negative attitudes towards European
morality. -->
In *Ecce Homo*, he states

<span style="padding-left: 20px; display:block">
My formula for greatness in a human being is *amor fati*: that one wants
nothing to be different, not forward, not backward, not in all
eternity. Not merely bear what is necessary, still less conceal it—all
idealism is mendacity in the face of what is necessary—but love it.
</span>

For Nietzsche, the love of life in all its
supra-moral necessity came first, and eternal recurrence was the brilliant
afterthought,
<!--, or rather, of the love of necessity.-->
less a metaphysical insight than a moral
heuristic for guiding one towards a love of fate.
<!-- guiding the individual towards *amor fati*. -->
<!-- Eternal recurrence rather a thought experiment by which to guide the individual towards
*amor fati*.
He equates this with a love of life and a rejection of the milquetoast
religious sensibilities he so detested. 
Whatever the similarities, there are subtle shifts in emphasis that
will lead us away, I think, from the indiscriminate acceptance of
Nietzsche's *amor fati*. -->
But I find Nietzsche's formulas, and the parallel to the Stoics,
ambiguous and problematic.
Both made a virtue of necessity.
For the Stoics, however, the emphasis is on the *fati*, the
powerlessness of human beings to intervene in the operation of the
universe.
The *amor* is merely the adaptive reaction.
As Epitectus writes (*Discourses*),

<span style="padding-left: 20px; display:block">
Being educated is precisely learning to will each thing just as it happens.
</span>
<!-- The Stoics had a bleak outlook on the human lot, and their love of
fate sprung from a philosophy of powerlessness within one's own life,
not from any grand cosmogony.
<!-- This springs from a bleak outlook on the human lot rather than any
cosmogonic musings. -->

This Stoic "will of reality" seems radically different from Nietzche's
infamous (and perhaps infamously misunderstood) "will to power".
When co-opted by the Nazis, it was solely about power over others [<sup><a id="fnr.1" name="fnr.1" class="footref" href="#fn.1">1</a></sup>], but in
*Thus Spake Zarathustra*, it is very obviously about power over the
self, or "self-overcoming" as he would write elsewhere, an
"unexhausted procreative will of life".
<!-- This "will of life" seems to more aptly capture the difference from
the Stoics than the "will to power".
<!-- , and also distinct from the Schopenhauerian "will to live", or mere
self-preservation. -->
This almost seems like the opposite of Epitectus' "will of
reality", and the Stoic acceptance of whatever comes your way a kind
of will to powerlessness, a *maladaptive* reaction.

<!-- In Nietzschean terms, there is something "anti-life" about the (now
proverbial) Stoic acceptance of whatever comes your way. -->
But Nietzsche's enthusiasm for what is necessary sometimes verges on
the indiscriminate, differing from the Stoics more on aesthetic than moral grounds.
Take this famous passage from *The Gay Science*:

<span style="padding-left: 20px; display:block">
I want to learn more and more to see as beautiful what is necessary in
things; then I shall be one of those who makes things beautiful. *Amor
fati*: let that be my love henceforth! I do not want to wage war
against what is ugly. I do not want to accuse; I do not even want to
accuse those who accuse. Looking away shall be my only negation. And
all in all and on the whole: some day I wish to be only a Yes-sayer.
</span>

Should we really say yes to everything? To suffering, to cruelty, to
forces which are explicitly against life? It's hard not to see
Nietzche the invalid peeking through here, scribbling madly in his sister's
garret and saying yes to his own suffering because like the Stoics, he
has no choice in the matter and would prefer to love rather than hate
it.
But not every necessity is virtuous, and a healthy creature can tell
the difference between what is good and what is bad for it.
This is part of the very "will of life" that Nietzsche exhorts, but
could not himself exercise.
There is a sickness in loving what is bad.

I think the doctrine of necessity and Yes-saying has things to
recommend it.
Suffering, privation, and doubt are not always or necessarily unhealthy, a
point I will return to below.
But appraising them in the scheme of a healthy life, on which one
trains the "unexhausted procreative will", is more complex and
potentially individual than an undifferentiated Yes.

#### A digression on free will

Both the Stoics and Nietzsche seem to subscribe to some form of
fatalism, that the course of events is fixed and inevitable.
To my definition of sickness, a fatalist might object that, life or
anti-life, you can't argue with reality.
As is often the case, Nietzsche's ideas on the topic are fuzzy and
contended by scholars, but as this line from the *The Gay Science*
shows, he seemed to believe both in fate and the individual as
constituted by self-creative acts:

<span style="padding-left: 20px; display:block">
What does your conscience say? — 'You shall become the person you are'.
</span>

In a sense, who we are *is* our fate.
This does not prevent our choices from being meaningful, and in fact,
the whole point of eternal recurrence is that it makes them more meaningful!
You will be constituted by this particular set of self-creative acts,
and no others, forevermore.

But can these decisions be meaningful if they are fated?
<!-- If they are inevitable, don't they imply a lack of free will?-->
This leads us naturally the problem of free will, the most hopelessly
confused of philosophical quandaries.
Here is one low-brow version: if I have a choice between $A$ and $B$,
and I am free to choose either option, then I have free will.
If my choice between $A$ and $B$ is predetermined, then it seems I am not
genuinely free. <!-- if A is a foregone conclusion, how can I be free to choose B?
<!-- Much ink has been spilled on the nature of "can", and if we take this
to mean, "compatibly with the physical state of the universe at the
time of choice", then the deterministic nature of classical physics
seems to rule out free will.
Proponents of free will, who interpret "can" in this  -->
<!-- Being "free to choose" is deeply ambiguous, leaving plenty of scope for the usual games
of language, logic and modal hair-splitting. -->
<!-- It turns out that being "free to choose" is a deeply ambiguous notion,
and it's worth a small digression to understand it better.-->
Before we go on, its worth a small digression to understand what being
"free to choose" really means.
If I have free will, then after choosing $A$, it is the case that I
"could have" chosen $B$.
This could mean two things: if things were different, I could have chosen
$B$; and if they were the same, I could chosen $B$.

I think most people will agree that if things were different, our
choices could change; they depend on circumstance.
They may differ on just how much difference is needed, but at the end
of the day, I don't think this is what people are really talking
about when they debate free will.
The second version imagines that, in some world where everything
prior to the decision is the same, I choose $B$ instead of $A$.
For this to be possible, two things need to hold: first, the
laws of physics are indeterminate, so the state of the world now does
not determine the state of the world in the future; and second, the
future does not already exist.
We need both, since indeterminacy by itself might still give rise to a
fixed (but not physically determined) future, and the non-existence of
future times is moot if their contents are determined in advance by physical law.
<!-- So this version of free will necessitates peculiar (and in my opinion
indefensible) views of time and physics.-->

Sometimes, people invoke the randomness of quantum
mechanics to ground the possibility of choosing $B$.
As we've just argued, quantum indeterminacy isn't enough to buy free
will; you also need the non-existence of the future.
But it's also clear that, if free will is about meaningful choice,
rolling a quantum dice doesn't cut it, any more than rolling a
classical dice to [make your decisions for you](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Dice_Man).
Rather than saving free will from determinism, the quantum dice
provides a reductio ad absurdum.

#### Meaning and choice

Why should the freedom to choose $B$ be tied to the
meaningfulness of choosing $A$?
I think the traditional free will debates rests on the same sort of
category error [affliciting presentism](https://hapax.github.io/philosophy/physics/psychology-time/).
Roughly speaking, in the case of presentism, cognitive properties are
mistaken for metaphysical ones.
Similarly, in the free will debate, a problem of ethics or
existentialism --- the meaning of human choice --- has been
transplanted into the metaphysical realm.
The idea that rolling quantum dice
into a non-existent future could be the source of human meaning
stretches credulity.

For decisions to be meaningful, we don't want them to be
random, but rather, to play a role with respect to a
different ensemble of decisions: the
sequence $A_i$ of decisions that make up my life.
If that sequence is "reflectively stable", in the sense that I would
happily make those choices again, why would the freedom to choose
$B_i$ matter?
To scratch that analytic itch, I'll define a choice $A$ as
reflectively stable if, at some later point $t$, for all (or perhaps
most) $t' > t$ we would will ourselves to make the same choice.
If $A$ is reflectively stable, you may regret it in the short term,
but not in the long.
This ties the loop between Epitectus' willing of reality and Nietzsche's willing of life.

This notion of long-term stability helps us reach a more nuanced
view of how choices contribute to who we are, since it is not "local"
or short-term effects that matter, but rather, *their "global" role in the ensemble*.
<!-- , how they contribute to or constitute
personal identity, to be reflectively stable. -->
Suffering, privation, and doubt can be "character
building", and as James Joyce said, mistakes sometimes act as "portals of discovery".
<!-- teach us important lessons, or "create character". -->
To act with creative self-regard and "procreative
will" is to make errors, deliberate, and explore.
This is the source of human meaning, not the counterfactual ability to choose $B$.
<!-- This has nothing to do with free will unless you
are the morbidly intellectual type and think about it too hard. -->

<!-- To help guide our intuition, imagine someone puts a
gun to your head and tells you to choose A over B.
Choosing A is clearly neither free nor meaningful.
<!-- How is the physical determinism of brainjam, the fatalism of the
Stoics, or the eternal recurrence of Nietzsche any different from a
gun? -->
<!-- But suppose that prior to this, you had carefully deliberated and
strongly leaned towards A.
Now your decision is unfree, but no longer clearly unmeaningful. -->

#### Brainjamor

<!-- The point of eternal recurrence is to optimise reflective stability.-->
In contrast to eternal recurrence, brainjam does not posit that time is cyclic.
Instead, we get one life, which we are doomed to live, moment by moment, in perpetuity.
<!-- Although the details differ from eternal recurrence, the implications
are the same: you will live forever, but this particular life, so make
it a good one. -->
<!-- Although *amor fati* is naturally connected to this idea, it does not
obviously follow. In Nietzsche's case, a love of life in all its
supra-moral necessity came first, and the pretty thought
experiment---eternal recurrence---was the brilliant afterthought.
I'd like to go in the other direction, starting with brainjam and
seeing what loves, if any, it licenses, the "brainjamor" if you'll
excuse the highbrow doggerel.
If we are boringly Humean-->
This is like a "parallelised" version of eternal recurrence: each
conscious moment is replayed in parallel, rather than in the serial repetitions of cyclic time.
<!-- The emphasis on moments in some sense "parallelises" eternal
recurrence. -->
Either way, we get a heuristic for optimising
reflective stability, and hence some suitably life-oriented notion of
*amor fati*, that is, loving who we are or are to become.

But brainjam draws attention to another aspect of human life: the
moment of experience itself. According to brainjam, each point in time
becomes an eternity, and life an experiential preserve made up of
these points.
*Amor fati* is a love of the collection, the
whole four-dimensional worldslug in Minkowski space.
In contrast, brainjam promotes "brainjamor" (if you'll excuse the
pun
[<sup><a id="fnr.2" name="fnr.2" class="footref" href="#fn.2">2</a></sup>]),
a love of each moment in addition to the whole.
With eternal recurrence, you might view something like doomscrolling
as a mere bump on the road to full and healthy personhood.
But brainjamor instructs us to ask the question: do we want to pickle
these moments into our jam, forever?
Maybe we should go outside and watch sunset instead.
Keats wrote "A thing of beauty is a joy forever."
Similarly, moments of unnecessary ugliness and boredom,
like morbidly reading articles about Trump or trawling Facebook, are
so forever.

Brainjamor suggests we should avoid these unless they are likely to
become reflectively stable.
In principle, this is hard to assess, but in practice it's clear that
there are no long-term benefits to reading the sixth article about the
collapse of democracy, and immediate benefits to going outside.
And who knows, being the sort of person who appreciates a sunset and
curbs their doomscrolling probably has long-term benefits as well [<sup><a id="fnr.3" name="fnr.3" class="footref" href="#fn.3">3</a></sup>].
<!-- Perhaps you should go outside and watch the sunset instead -->
<!-- [<sup><a id="fnr.3" name="fnr.3" class="footref" href="#fn.3">3</a></sup>]. -->

---

<div class="footdef"><sup><a id="fn.1" name="fn.1" class="footnum"
href="#fnr.1">Footnote 1</a></sup> <p class="footpara">
Nietzsche does discuss power over others, but
unlike the creative "self-overcoming" or "will of life", it is more often in
naturalistic terms, and I'm not sure to what extent he makes a virtue  of it.
Whatever the case, here I just want to focus on how it relates to
<i>amor fati</i>.
</p></div>

<div class="footdef"><sup><a id="fn.2" name="fn.2" class="footnum"
href="#fnr.2">Footnote 2</a></sup> <p class="footpara">
I was also considering "momento amori", which is groan-worthy
and half-baked. Consider yourself lucky.
</p></div>

<div class="footdef"><sup><a id="fn.3" name="fn.3" class="footnum"
href="#fnr.3">Footnote 3</a></sup> <p class="footpara">
Doomscrolling is just an example. The point is
that brainjam provides a useful heuristic for assessing our
decisions and encouraging mindfulness. Of course, it is maladaptive to
obsess over the moment, in the same way it is maladaptive to obsess
over your eternally recurring life journey. I think this is why the
"will of life"—which discourages this sort of unhealthy obsession—is
usefully viewed as a separate component from *amor fati* or brainjamor.
</p></div>
