---
Layout: post
mathjax: true
comments: true
title:  "Approximating large powers"
categories: [Math, Hacks]
date:  2022-12-03
---

**December 3, 2022.** *A short guide to estimating large powers.*

## Introduction
---

Say I want to estimate a perfect power like $67^{13}$, but don't have a calculator.<label for="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle sidenote-number">
</label>
<input type="checkbox"
       id="sn-1"
       class="margin-toggle"/>
	   <span class="sidenote">If this isn't sufficient motivation, it's
easy to make the power so large that no calculator will give you an
answer!</span> How do I go
about approximating it? I'll build up a few techniques that are
 sufficient for an order of magnitude estimate, and even a significant
 digit or two.

<div style="background-color: #EAD1DC; padding: 10px; border: 1px
solid purple; line-height:1.5">
<b>The proximate power problem.</b> <br>

Give an order of magnitude estimate of $n^p$, where $n$ and $p$ are
potentially large integers, without a calculator. For bonus points, provide a significant digit.
</div>

## Perfect powers
---

<div style="background-color: #cfc; padding: 10px; border: 1px
solid green; line-height:1.5">
<i>Tip 1.</i> <b>Single-digit powers.</b><br>

Know how to relate single-digit powers to powers of $10$.
</div>

The first step is to relate single-digit powers to powers of $10$. For
instance, as commonly known to coders, $2^{10} = 1024 \approx 10^3$,
so we can approximate binary powers easily enough. Here's a list of
tricks for $2$ to $7$, omitting powers of $2$ and $3$:

$$
\begin{align*}
2^{10} & = 1024 \approx 10^3 \\
3^2 & = 9 \approx 10 \\
5 & = \frac{10}{2} \\
6^9 & = 1.01 \times 10^7 \approx
10^7 \\
7^2 & = 49 \approx \frac{100}{2}.
\end{align*}
$$

Also, for good measure:

$$
e^3 \approx 20.
$$

We can use these to give quick and dirty estimates. For instance,

$$
\begin{align*}
67^{13} & = 6.7^{13} \times 10^{13} \\
& \approx 7\times 7^{12}\times 10^{13} \\
& \approx 7 \times 49^6 \times 10^{13} \\
& \approx \frac{7}{2^6} \times 100^6 \times 10^{13} \\
& \approx 10^{24}.
\end{align*}
$$

If you get a calculator out, you find the answer is in fact

$$
67^{13} = 5.5 \times 10^{23},
$$

so this is correct to the nearest order of magnitude. Great! But
clearly, by replacing $6.7$ by $7$ on the second line we are going to
overestimate. Can we do better? The rest of this post is devoted to
exploring techniques for doing this, but if you're happy with order of
magnitude, stop here.

## Binomial boost
---

<div style="background-color: #cfc ; padding: 10px; border: 1px
solid green; line-height:1.5">
<i>Tip 2.</i> <b>Binomial expansions.</b><br>

Improve accuracy by performing a binomial expansion.
</div>

The [binomial theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binomial_theorem)
gives us a way to improve these estimates.
In general, we have

$$
(1+x)^n = 1 + nx + \binom{n}{2}x^2 + \cdots + x^n = \sum_{k=0}^n \binom{n}{k}x^k.
$$

So, for instance,

$$
\begin{align*}
67^{13} &= 70^{13}\left(1 - \frac{0.3}{7}\right)^{13} \\
& =
70^{13}\left[1 - \frac{13\times 0.3}{7} + \frac{13\times 12 \times (0.3)^2}{2\times 7^2} - \frac{13 \times 12 \times 11 \times (0.3)^3}{6\times 7^3} + \cdots\right]\\
& \approx 70^{13}\left[1 - 0.55 + 0.14 - 0.02 \right]\\
& \approx 0.57 \times 10^{24} \\
&  = 5.7 \times 10^{23},
\end{align*}
$$

using the estimate from the previous section.
This is much better!
We've ignored the factor of $70/2^6$, which means we've
underestimated, but we've also replaced $7^{12}$ with $(100/2)^6$,
which is an overestimate, and the two almost cancel. As an exercise,
you can use the binomial approximation to check this.

In doing a binomial expansion, where should you stop? Depends on how
much precision you want. Here, I went to third order since it gave
terms of size $\sim 0.01$, which is the precision I wanted to try and
match the correct answer above. How did I know? Well, I know terms in
the expansion have the form

$$
\binom{n}{k}x^k = \binom{n}{k-1} x^{k-1} \times \frac{x (n-k+1)}{k},
$$

so for $n = 13$ and $x = -0.3/7$, progressive terms shrink by
$\sim 0.04$ give or take. So I can probably stop after a term of the
size I want, in this case, the third term, which was order $\sim 0.01$.

## Fast factors
---

<div style="background-color: #cfc ; padding: 10px; border: 1px
solid green; line-height:1.5">
<i>Tip 3.</i> <b>Factorize.</b><br>

Factorize to simpler nearby numbers, then restore the original with a binomial expansion.
</div>

There are other ways to skin this cat. Another strategy is factoring
to a simpler number nearby. In our case, we can note that

$$
67 \approx 66 = 6 \times 11.
$$

Then

$$
\begin{align*}
67^{13} & \approx 6^{13} \times 11^{13} \\
& \approx 6^4 \times 6^9 \times 10^{13}\times (1 + 0.1)^{13} \\
& \approx 1300 \times 10^{20} \times (1 + 1.3 + 0.78 + 0.286) \\
& \approx 1.3 \times 10^{23} \times 3.37 \\
& \approx 4.4 \times 10^{23},
\end{align*}
$$

using our trick $6^9 \approx 10^7$ on the third line. Again, we can
improve this estimate by binomially expanding from $66^{13}$ to
$67^{13}$, a task I leave for the diligent reader. Taking just the
leading term in this second binomial expansion gives $5.3 \times
10^{23}$, a decent improvement.
I'm not sure I like this method better --- it involves two expansions --- but it does illustrate the utility of factoring.

## Lucky logs
---

<div style="background-color: #cfc ; padding: 10px; border: 1px
solid green; line-height:1.5">
<i>Tip 4.</i> <b>Take logarithms.</b><br>

Use log laws and the Taylor expansion to estimate the log of the base.
</div>

The last method we'll look at is logarithms.
Here, we use the fact that

$$
n^p = 10^{p\log_{10}n},
$$

so if we know $\log_{10}n$ we immediately have an order of magnitude
estimate.
We can use log laws

$$
\log_b (xy) = \log_bx + \log_b y, \quad \log_b x = \frac{\ln x}{\ln b}
$$

where $\ln$ is the natural logarithm, and the Taylor expansion

$$
\ln(1 - x) = -x - \frac{x^2}{2} - \frac{x^3}{3} - \cdots.
$$

Let's use these to estimate $\log_{10} 67$. We'll also exploit the
fact that $\ln 10 \approx 2.3$. From log laws, we have

$$
\begin{align*}
\log_{10} 67 & = 2 + \log_{10} 0.67 \\
& = 2 + \frac{\ln 0.67}{\ln 10} \\
& \approx 2 + \frac{\ln 0.67}{2.3}.
\end{align*}
$$

We now focus on the Taylor expansion. Since $0.67 \approx 1 - 1/3$, we
can write

$$
\ln 0.67 \approx \ln\left(1 - \tfrac{1}{3}\right) = -\frac{1}{3} -
\frac{1}{18} - \frac{1}{3\times 27} - \cdots \approx -\frac{37}{81}.
$$

So we get an index

$$
\begin{align*}
13\log_{10} 67 & \approx 26 - \frac{13\times 37}{2.3\times 81} \\
& \approx 26 - \frac{13 \times 35}{2.5 \times 80} \\
& \approx 26 - 2.275 \\ & = 23.725.
\end{align*}
$$

So we recover our order of magnitude estimate

$$
67^{13} \approx 10^{23.725}.
$$

Evaluating the mantissa with a calculator, we get

$$
10^{0.725} \approx 5.3,
$$

so this method is comparable in accuracy to our binomial expansions.
In both cases, we kept terms up to $x^3$, so this is about what we
expect.

## Magic mantissas
---

<div style="background-color: #cfc ; padding: 10px; border: 1px
solid green; line-height:1.5">
<i>Tip 5.</i> <b>Evaluate the mantissa.</b><br>

Get a significant digit in the log method by splitting the mantissa
into a simple part and a small part you can Taylor expand with the exponential.
</div>

The disadvantage of the log method is that it's a bit hard to see what
the mantissa is.
Hard, but not impossible! One method is to use the Taylor
series for the exponential:


$$
e^x = 1 + x + \frac{1}{2}x^2 + \frac{1}{3!}x^3 + \cdots .
$$

This turns out to be a bit messy to use directly, because
the index is large and you need to include a bunch of terms in the
expansion to get stable digits.
Instead, we we split $0.725 = 0.7 + 0.025$, and deal with $0.7$ first:

$$
\begin{align*}
10^{0.7} & \approx 10^{7/10} \\
& = (10^3)^{(7/10) \times (1/3)} \\
& \approx \sqrt[3]{(2^{10})^{7/10}}\\
& = \sqrt[3]{2^7} \\
& = \sqrt[3]{128} \\ & \approx 5,
\end{align*}
$$

since $5^3 = 125$.
The cute thing is that we have just used facts from our "power table".
We can use the exponential expansion for the remaining $0.025 = 1/40$, with

$$
10^{1/40} = e^{\ln 10/40} \approx e^{2.3/40} \approx 1 + \frac{2.3}{40} \approx 1.06,
$$

using only the leading term in the expansion.
We then multiply to find

$$
10^{0.725} = 10^{0.7} \times 10^{0.025} \approx 5 \times 1.06 = 5.3,
$$

as claimed above!
